README.md, before:

﻿# RaspberryPi_WebRTC
 
Turn your Raspberry Pi into a home security camera using the v4l2 DMA hardware encoder and WebRTC.

Raspberry Pi 5 or other SBCs do not support v4l2 hardware encoding, please run this project in software encoding mode.

# How to use

* Download the latest binary file from [Releases](https://github.com/TzuHuanTai/RaspberryPi_WebRTC/releases).
* Install the [Pi Camera](https://github.com/TzuHuanTai/Pi-Camera) app and follow the instructions.

## Hardware Requirements

<img src="https://assets.raspberrypi.com/static/51035ec4c2f8f630b3d26c32e90c93f1/2b8d7/zero2-hero.webp" height="96">

* Raspberry Pi [Zero 2W](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-zero-2-w/) (or better).
* CSI Camera Module.
* At least 4GB micro sd card.
* A USB disk and a Micro-USB Male to USB-A Female adaptor.

## Environment Setup

1. Use the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) to write the Lite OS (Bookworm 64-bit) to the micro SD card.
2. Install essential libs
    ```bash
    sudo apt install libmosquitto1 pulseaudio libavformat59 libswscale6
    ```

3. Enable Raspberry Pi Hardware by adding below in `/boot/firmware/config.txt`
    ```text
    camera_auto_detect=0
    start_x=1
    gpu_mem=16
    ```
    Set `camera_auto_detect=0` in order to read camera by v4l2.

4. Mount USB disk [[ref]](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/AutoFS)

    * Skip this step if you don't want to record videos. Don't set the `record_path` flag while running.
    * When the disk drive is detected, it will automatically mount to `/mnt/ext_disk`.
    ```bash
    sudo apt-get install autofs
    echo '/- /etc/auto.usb --timeout=5' | sudo tee -a /etc/auto.master > /dev/null
    echo '/mnt/ext_disk -fstype=auto,nofail,nodev,nosuid,noatime,umask=000 :/dev/sda1' | sudo tee -a /etc/auto.usb > /dev/null
    sudo systemctl restart autofs
    ```

## Running the Application

MQTT is currently the only signaling mechanism used, so ensure that your MQTT server is ready before starting the application. It is recommended to use a cloud-based MQTT server. If your ISP provides a dynamic IP and you want to access the signaling server remotely via mobile data while away from home, you might need to spend additional time setting up DDNS and port forwarding.

### Run
- Running the binary file `pi_webrtc` with the `-h` flag will display all available options. 

- To start the application, use your settings and apply them to the following example command below. The SDP/ICE data will be transferred under the MQTT topic specified by your `uid` setting.
    ```bash
    # run the PulseAudio service if it is not started.
    pulseaudio --start

    # run main program with your settings
    /path/to/pi_webrtc --device=/dev/video0 --fps=30 --width=1280 --height=960 --v4l2_format=h264 --hw_accel --mqtt_host=example.s1.eu.hivemq.cloud --mqtt_port=8883 --mqtt_username=hakunamatata --mqtt_password=Wonderful --uid=home-pi-zero2w --record_path=/mnt/ext_disk/video/
    ```

    **Hint 1:** Since the Pi 5 does not support hardware encoding, please remove the `--hw_accel` flag and set `--v4l2_format` to `mjpeg`. Video encoding will be handled by [OpenH264](https://github.com/cisco/openh264).
    
    **Hint 2:** I noticed that when I set `1920x1080`, the hardware decoder firmware changes it to `1920x1088`, but the isp/encoder does not adjust in the 6.6.31 kernel. This leads to memory being out of range. However, if I set `1920x1088`, all works fine.

### Run as Linux Service

#### 1. Run `pulseaudio` as system-wide daemon [[ref]](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/User/SystemWide/):
* create a file `/etc/systemd/system/pulseaudio.service`
    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description= Pulseaudio Daemon
    After=rtkit-daemon.service systemd-udevd.service dbus.service

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    ExecStart=/usr/bin/pulseaudio --system --disallow-exit --disallow-module-loading --log-target=journal
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```
* Run the cmd to add a `autospawn = no` in the client conf
    ```bash
    echo 'autospawn = no' | sudo tee -a /etc/pulse/client.conf > /dev/null
    ```
* Add root to pulse group
    ```bash
    sudo adduser root pulse-access
    ```
* Enable and Start the Service
    ```bash
    sudo systemctl daemon-reload
    sudo systemctl enable pulseaudio.service
    sudo systemctl start pulseaudio.service
    ```

#### 2. In order to run `pi_webrtc` and ensure it starts automatically on reboot:
* Create a service file `/etc/systemd/system/pi-webrtc.service` with the following content:
    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description= The p2p camera via webrtc.
    After=systemd-networkd.service

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    WorkingDirectory=/path/to
    ExecStart=/path/to/pi_webrtc --device=/dev/video0 --fps=30 --width=1280 --height=960 --v4l2_format=h264 --hw_accel --mqtt_host=example.s1.eu.hivemq.cloud --mqtt_port=8883 --mqtt_username=hakunamatata --mqtt_password=wonderful --record_path=/mnt/ext_disk/video/
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10
      
    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```
* Enable and Start the Service
    ```bash
    sudo systemctl daemon-reload
    sudo systemctl enable pi-webrtc.service
    sudo systemctl start pi-webrtc.service
    ```

## Advance

To enable two-way communication, a microphone and speaker need to be added to the Pi.

### Microphone

Please see this [link](https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-i2s-mems-microphone-breakout/raspberry-pi-wiring-test) for instructions on wiring and testing your Pi.

### Speaker

You can use the [link](https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-max98357-i2s-class-d-mono-amp/raspberry-pi-wiring) for instructions on setting up a speaker on your Pi.

# License

This project is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
Copyright 2022 Tzu Huan Tai (Author)

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```

Commit message:

chore: add free plans mqtt description

README.md, after:

﻿# RaspberryPi_WebRTC
 
Turn your Raspberry Pi into a home security camera using the v4l2 DMA hardware encoder and WebRTC.

Raspberry Pi 5 or other SBCs do not support v4l2 hardware encoding, please run this project in software encoding mode.

# How to use

* Download the latest binary file from [Releases](https://github.com/TzuHuanTai/RaspberryPi_WebRTC/releases).
* Install the [Pi Camera](https://github.com/TzuHuanTai/Pi-Camera) app and follow the instructions.

## Hardware Requirements

<img src="https://assets.raspberrypi.com/static/51035ec4c2f8f630b3d26c32e90c93f1/2b8d7/zero2-hero.webp" height="96">

* Raspberry Pi [Zero 2W](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-zero-2-w/) (or better).
* CSI Camera Module.
* At least 4GB micro sd card.
* A USB disk and a Micro-USB Male to USB-A Female adaptor.

## Environment Setup

1. Use the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/) to write the Lite OS (Bookworm 64-bit) to the micro SD card.
2. Install essential libs
    ```bash
    sudo apt install libmosquitto1 pulseaudio libavformat59 libswscale6
    ```

3. Enable Raspberry Pi Hardware by adding below in `/boot/firmware/config.txt`
    ```text
    camera_auto_detect=0
    start_x=1
    gpu_mem=16
    ```
    Set `camera_auto_detect=0` in order to read camera by v4l2.

4. Mount USB disk [[ref]](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/AutoFS)

    * Skip this step if you don't want to record videos. Don't set the `record_path` flag while running.
    * When the disk drive is detected, it will automatically mount to `/mnt/ext_disk`.
    ```bash
    sudo apt-get install autofs
    echo '/- /etc/auto.usb --timeout=5' | sudo tee -a /etc/auto.master > /dev/null
    echo '/mnt/ext_disk -fstype=auto,nofail,nodev,nosuid,noatime,umask=000 :/dev/sda1' | sudo tee -a /etc/auto.usb > /dev/null
    sudo systemctl restart autofs
    ```

## Running the Application

MQTT is currently the only signaling mechanism used, so ensure that your MQTT server is ready before starting the application. It is recommended to use a cloud-based MQTT server. Free plans include, but are not limited to, [HiveMQ](https://www.hivemq.com) and [EXMQ](https://www.emqx.com/en). If you're self-hosting and you want to access the signaling server remotely via mobile data, you may need to set up DDNS and port forwarding if your ISP provides a dynamic IP.

### Run
- Running the binary file `pi_webrtc` with the `-h` flag will display all available options. 

- To start the application, use your settings and apply them to the following example command below. The SDP/ICE data will be transferred under the MQTT topic specified by your `uid` setting.
    ```bash
    # run the PulseAudio service if it is not started.
    pulseaudio --start

    # run main program with your settings
    /path/to/pi_webrtc --device=/dev/video0 --fps=30 --width=1280 --height=960 --v4l2_format=h264 --hw_accel --mqtt_host=example.s1.eu.hivemq.cloud --mqtt_port=8883 --mqtt_username=hakunamatata --mqtt_password=Wonderful --uid=home-pi-zero2w --record_path=/mnt/ext_disk/video/
    ```

    **Hint 1:** Since the Pi 5 does not support hardware encoding, please remove the `--hw_accel` flag and set `--v4l2_format` to `mjpeg`. Video encoding will be handled by [OpenH264](https://github.com/cisco/openh264).
    
    **Hint 2:** I noticed that when I set `1920x1080`, the hardware decoder firmware changes it to `1920x1088`, but the isp/encoder does not adjust in the 6.6.31 kernel. This leads to memory being out of range. However, if I set `1920x1088`, all works fine.

### Run as Linux Service

#### 1. Run `pulseaudio` as system-wide daemon [[ref]](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/User/SystemWide/):
* create a file `/etc/systemd/system/pulseaudio.service`
    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description= Pulseaudio Daemon
    After=rtkit-daemon.service systemd-udevd.service dbus.service

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    ExecStart=/usr/bin/pulseaudio --system --disallow-exit --disallow-module-loading --log-target=journal
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```
* Run the cmd to add a `autospawn = no` in the client conf
    ```bash
    echo 'autospawn = no' | sudo tee -a /etc/pulse/client.conf > /dev/null
    ```
* Add root to pulse group
    ```bash
    sudo adduser root pulse-access
    ```
* Enable and Start the Service
    ```bash
    sudo systemctl daemon-reload
    sudo systemctl enable pulseaudio.service
    sudo systemctl start pulseaudio.service
    ```

#### 2. In order to run `pi_webrtc` and ensure it starts automatically on reboot:
* Create a service file `/etc/systemd/system/pi-webrtc.service` with the following content:
    ```ini
    [Unit]
    Description= The p2p camera via webrtc.
    After=systemd-networkd.service

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    WorkingDirectory=/path/to
    ExecStart=/path/to/pi_webrtc --device=/dev/video0 --fps=30 --width=1280 --height=960 --v4l2_format=h264 --hw_accel --mqtt_host=example.s1.eu.hivemq.cloud --mqtt_port=8883 --mqtt_username=hakunamatata --mqtt_password=wonderful --record_path=/mnt/ext_disk/video/
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10
      
    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```
* Enable and Start the Service
    ```bash
    sudo systemctl daemon-reload
    sudo systemctl enable pi-webrtc.service
    sudo systemctl start pi-webrtc.service
    ```

## Advance

To enable two-way communication, a microphone and speaker need to be added to the Pi.

### Microphone

Please see this [link](https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-i2s-mems-microphone-breakout/raspberry-pi-wiring-test) for instructions on wiring and testing your Pi.

### Speaker

You can use the [link](https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruit-max98357-i2s-class-d-mono-amp/raspberry-pi-wiring) for instructions on setting up a speaker on your Pi.

# License

This project is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
Copyright 2022 Tzu Huan Tai (Author)

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```
